PROTOCOL: Strength/resistance training

IMPACT: Key areas of impact
EVIDENCE LEVEL: Level of evidence:
RISK LEVEL: Potential risk
HARM LEVEL: Abstract:BACKGROUND
Relative energy deficiency in sport (REDs) is a condition that is associated with negative health and performance outcomes in athletes. Insufficient energy intake relative to exercise energy expenditure, resulting in low energy availability, is the underlying cause, which triggers numerous adverse physiological consequences including several associated with musculoskeletal (MSK) health and neuromuscular performance.

PURPOSE
This commentary aims to (1) discuss the health and performance implications of REDs on the skeletal and neuromuscular systems and (2) examine the role that MSK training (ie, strength and plyometric training) during treatment and return to performance following REDs might have on health and performance in athletes, with practical guidelines provided.

CONCLUSIONS
REDs is associated with decreases in markers of bone health, lean body mass, maximal and explosive strength, and muscle work capacity. Restoration of optimal energy availability, mainly through an increase in energy intake, is the primary goal during the initial treatment of REDs with a return to performance managed by a multidisciplinary team of specialists. MSK training is an effective nonpharmacological component of treatment for REDs, which offers multiple long-term health and performance benefits, assuming the energy needs of athletes are met as part of their recovery. Supervised, prescribed, and gradually progressive MSK training should include a combination of resistance training and high-impact plyometric-based exercise to promote MSK adaptations, with an initial focus on achieving movement competency. Progressing MSK training exercises to higher intensities will have the greatest effects on bone health and strength performance in the long term.
DESCRIPTION: Strength training is one of the most well-documented interventions supporting health, performance, and longevity. Regular resistance exercises lead to increased muscle mass and strength, improved bone mineral density, fat reduction, and enhanced joint stability. As such, strength training plays a key role in injury prevention, sarcopenia prevention, and maintaining functional fitness at every stage of life.

CONTENT SECTIONS:

Strength/resistance training

Improved body composition, strength, and bone health

Strength training is one of the most well-documented interventions supporting health, performance, and longevity. Regular resistance exercises lead to increased muscle mass and strength, improved bone mineral density, fat reduction, and enhanced joint stability. As such, strength training plays a key role in injury prevention, sarcopenia prevention, and maintaining functional fitness at every stage of life.

Level of evidence:Strong

Strength training works by increasing mechanical load on muscles and bones, which stimulates cellular adaptations that lead to muscle hypertrophy and increased bone mineral density. Resistance exercises improve neuromuscular coordination, stabilize joints, and accelerate recovery. Regular load progression and appropriate numbers of repetitions and sets enable gradual improvements in strength, muscle mass, and overall musculoskeletal function.

Strength training is safe for most people when performed correctly and with appropriate progression. However, mild, temporary side effects may occur, especially with excessive load increases or poor technique.

Strength training is not recommended for some individuals or requires program modifications and supervision.

2–4 sessions per week, 8–12 repetitions per set, 2–4 sets per muscle group; start at 40–60% 1RM with gradual load progression

Exercises with free weights, machines, resistance bands, or bodyweight

Initial results in 4–8 weeks, full improvements in strength and muscle mass after 3–6 months

Can be performed any time, ideally after a light meal and during peak energy hours

Combines well with aerobic training and mobility or stretching exercises

What Not to Combine With

Avoid intense strength training without a warm-up, or when sick or exhausted

Gradual load progression

Increase weight, repetitions, or sets slowly – consistency matters more than rapid overload

Technique over weight

Proper movement technique prevents injuries and ensures better results

Rest days are crucial for muscle growth and preventing overuse injuries

Best results come from working all major muscle groups – not just isolated ones

Beginners, people with chronic conditions or past injuries should consult a trainer or physical therapist

Warm-up and stretching

Do 5–10 minutes of warm-up before training and light stretching afterward

Musculoskeletal system

Strength training has a clear positive effect on the musculoskeletal system. Regular strength exercises improve muscle strength, bone density, joint stability, and reduce the risk of musculoskeletal pain and injuries.

Key benefits of strength training for the musculoskeletal system

Strength training has a clearly positive impact on body composition. Regular resistance exercises lead to increased muscle mass and fat reduction, improving the overall muscle-to-fat ratio.

Changes in muscle and fat mass

Differences by age, sex, and intensity

Strength training has proven positive effects on joint and bone health. Regular resistance exercises strengthen muscles, improve joint stability, increase bone mineral density, and reduce injury and osteoporosis risk.

Study summary: Strength training and joint and bone health

Scientific data and sources

Level of evidenceStrong

Number of included studies:57

Final comment:The effectiveness of strength training has been confirmed by numerous meta-analyses and randomized controlled trials conducted across various populations, including healthy individuals, seniors, people with chronic illnesses, and postmenopausal women. Scientific data clearly indicate that regular resistance training leads to increased muscle mass, reduced fat tissue, improved strength, increased bone mineral density, and joint stabilization. These effects occur regardless of age or sex, and the efficacy of strength training has been demonstrated both in prevention and treatment of many musculoskeletal disorders. The evidence comes from large-scale, high-quality studies, justifying a strong level of evidence.

The Benefits of Strength Training on Musculoskeletal System Health: Practical Applications for Interdisciplinary Care

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training provides multi-systemic benefits for musculoskeletal health, with practical applications for common disorders and primary prevention strategies.

Abstract:Global health organizations have provided recommendations regarding exercise for the general population. Strength training has been included in several position statements due to its multi-systemic benefits. In this narrative review, we examine the available literature, first explaining how specific mechanical loading is converted into positive cellular responses. Secondly, benefits related to specific musculoskeletal tissues are discussed, with practical applications and training programmes clearly outlined for both common musculoskeletal disorders and primary prevention strategies.

Musculoskeletal exercise: Its role in promoting health and longevity.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Resistance training can improve health and longevity by increasing muscle strength, mass, balance, metabolic rate, bone density, reduce body fat, and enhance cognitive function and psychological well-being.

A Systematic Review of Workplace Interventions to Rehabilitate Musculoskeletal Disorders Among Employees with Physical Demanding Work

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training at the workplace can reduce musculoskeletal disorders among workers with physically demanding work, while workplace ergonomics and multifaceted interventions show no beneficial effect.

Abstract:Abstract Purpose This systematic review investigates the effectiveness of workplace interventions to rehabilitate musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) among employees with physically demanding work. Methods A systematic search was conducted in bibliographic databases including PubMed and Web of Science Core Collection for English articles published from 1998 to 2018. The PICO strategy guided the assessment of study relevance and the bibliographical search for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-RCTs in which (1) participants were adult workers with physically demanding work and MSD (including specific and non-specific MSD and musculoskeletal pain, symptoms, and discomfort), (2) interventions were initiated and/or carried out at the workplace, (3) a comparison group was included, and (4) a measure of MSD was reported (including musculoskeletal pain, symptoms, prevalence or discomfort). The quality assessment and evidence synthesis adhered to the guidelines developed by the Institute for Work &amp; Health (Toronto, Canada) focusing on developing practical recommendations for stakeholders. Relevant stakeholders were engaged in the review process. Results Level of evidence from 54 high and medium quality studies showed moderate evidence of a positive effect of physical exercise. Within this domain, there was strong evidence of a positive effect of workplace strength training. There was limited evidence for ergonomics and strong evidence for no benefit of participatory ergonomics, multifaceted interventions, and stress management. No intervention domains were associated with “negative effects”. Conclusions The evidence synthesis recommends that implementing strength training at the workplace can reduce MSD among workers with physically demanding work. In regard to workplace ergonomics, there was not enough evidence from the scientific literature to guide current practices. Based on the scientific literature, participatory ergonomics and multifaceted workplace interventions seem to have no beneficial effect on reducing MSD among this group of workers. As these interventional domains were very heterogeneous, it should also be recognized that general conclusions about their effectiveness should be done with care. Systematic review registration PROSPERO CRD42018116752 ( ).

The Importance of Muscular Strength: Training Considerations

Number of 

Key takeaways:Muscular strength development can be improved through a combination of bilateral training, eccentric training, and variable resistance training, with multiple sets and rest intervals enhancing performance.

Abstract:This review covers underlying physiological characteristics and training considerations that may affect muscular strength including improving maximal force expression and time-limited force expression. Strength is underpinned by a combination of morphological and neural factors including muscle cross-sectional area and architecture, musculotendinous stiffness, motor unit recruitment, rate coding, motor unit synchronization, and neuromuscular inhibition. Although single- and multi-targeted block periodization models may produce the greatest strength-power benefits, concepts within each model must be considered within the limitations of the sport, athletes, and schedules. Bilateral training, eccentric training and accentuated eccentric loading, and variable resistance training may produce the greatest comprehensive strength adaptations. Bodyweight exercise, isolation exercises, plyometric exercise, unilateral exercise, and kettlebell training may be limited in their potential to improve maximal strength but are still relevant to strength development by challenging time-limited force expression and differentially challenging motor demands. Training to failure may not be necessary to improve maximum muscular strength and is likely not necessary for maximum gains in strength. Indeed, programming that combines heavy and light loads may improve strength and underpin other strength-power characteristics. Multiple sets appear to produce superior training benefits compared to single sets; however, an athlete’s training status and the dose–response relationship must be considered. While 2- to 5-min interset rest intervals may produce the greatest strength-power benefits, rest interval length may vary based an athlete’s training age, fiber type, and genetics. Weaker athletes should focus on developing strength before emphasizing power-type training. Stronger athletes may begin to emphasize power-type training while maintaining/improving their strength. Future research should investigate how best to implement accentuated eccentric loading and variable resistance training and examine how initial strength affects an athlete’s ability to improve their performance following various training methods.

impact of strength training on the prevention of orthopedic injuries in sports: a literature review.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training effectively prevents orthopedic injuries in athletes by enhancing muscle strength, joint stability, and endurance, addressing musculoskeletal weaknesses and imbalances.

Abstract:Introduction: The perception of physical activity has evolved, influenced by urbanization, media, and public health initiatives. While regular physical activity offers health benefits, musculoskeletal injuries in athletes remain a concern, often going unnoticed due to subtle symptoms. Preventing these injuries is crucial, with strength training (ST) emerging as a strategy to enhance stability and reduce injury risk. 
Purpose of the Study: This review examines the impact of strength training on preventing orthopedic injuries in athletes, focusing on mechanisms like muscle strengthening, joint stabilization, improved endurance, and correcting imbalances. It evaluates research on ST's effectiveness in preventing knee, ankle, hip, back, and upper limb injuries. 
Methodology: A comprehensive search of databases, including PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar, was conducted using keywords such as 'strength training,' 'orthopedic injury prevention,' 'musculoskeletal stability,' 'injury risk reduction,' and 'sports injuries.' 
Results: Strength training plays a key role in preventing sports injuries by enhancing muscle strength, joint stability, and endurance, addressing musculoskeletal weaknesses and imbalances. Studies show ST significantly reduces knee, ankle, hip, and back injuries. For instance, knee injuries are prevented by strengthening the hip abductors and quadriceps, while ankle injuries are mitigated by improving core and lower limb strength. ST also prevents injuries in 'overhead sports' by enhancing shoulder stability. 
Keywords: strength training, orthopedic injury prevention, musculoskeletal stability, sports injuries, injury risk reduction.

Musculoskeletal Hypertrophy Training for Overweight and Obesity

Number of 

Key takeaways:Musculoskeletal hypertrophy training improves health in overweight and obese individuals, with cultural ignorance being a main barrier to their success.

Abstract:The present research is an exploratory, descriptive, and documentary study that aimed to analyze the impact of musculoskeletal hypertrophy training on the improvement of overweight and obesity. Different 

Importance of Frequency and Intensity of Strength Training for Reduced Musculoskeletal Pain in the Back, Neck-Shoulder, and Arm-Hand Among Physical Therapists.

Number of 

Key takeaways:High-intensity strength training during leisure time is strongly associated with lower levels of musculoskeletal pain in physical therapists' arms, neck-shoulder, and back, while frequency and lower intensities show no significant association.

Abstract:BACKGROUND
Musculoskeletal pain (MP) is common among health care professionals, including physical therapists (PTs). The physically demanding nature of their work might contribute to increase MP rates. Strength training has a positive effect on musculoskeletal health and MP. However, no studies have evaluated the association of strength training during leisure time on MP among PTs. This study aims to analyze the association between frequency and intensity of strength training during leisure time and MP in the back, neck-shoulder, and arm-hand among PTs.

METHODS
Data on MP and intensity and frequency of strength training were obtained using a questionnaire responded by 1006 PTs. The odds for having lower level of MP as a function of intensity or frequency of the strength training were estimated using binary logistic regression.

RESULTS
High-intensity strength training showed strong associations with lower intensity of MP in neck-shoulder (odds ratio = 5.08; 95% confidence interval, 1.36-18.92), arm-hand (odds ratio = 5.22; 95% confidence interval, 1.11-24.51), and back (odds ratio = 5.22; 95% confidence interval, 1.41-19.28). However, frequency and lower intensities were not significantly associated with MP in any body part.

CONCLUSIONS
High-intensity strength training is strongly associated with lower levels of MP in arm-hand, neck-shoulder, and back, whereas no association was found with frequency or lower intensities.

Strength training in relation to injury prevention in professional and semi-professional women's football: A systematic review

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training shows beneficial effects in reducing injuries in professional and semi-professional women's football.

The effect of combined resistance exercise training and vitamin D3 supplementation on musculoskeletal health and function in older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis

Number of 

Key takeaways:Combined resistance exercise and vitamin D3 supplementation may improve muscle strength in older adults, but no additional benefits were shown for other functional variables.

Abstract:Objectives In older adults, there is a blunted responsiveness to resistance training and reduced muscle hypertrophy compared with younger adults. There is evidence that both exercise training and vitamin D supplementation may benefit musculoskeletal health in older adults, and it is plausible that in combination their effects may be additive. The aim of this systematic review was to evaluate the effectiveness of combined resistance exercise training and vitamin D3 supplementation on musculoskeletal health in older adults. Data sources A comprehensive search of electronic databases, including Science Direct, Medline, PubMed, Google Scholar and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (Cochrane CENTRAL accessed by Wiley Science) was conducted. Eligible studies were randomised controlled trials including men and women (aged ≥65 years or mean age ≥65 years); enlisting resistance exercise training and vitamin D3 supplementation; including outcomes of muscle strength, function, muscle power, body composition, serum vitamin D/calcium status or quality of life comparing results with a control group. The review was informed by a preregistered protocol ( Results Seven studies including a total of 792 participants were identified. Studies were categorised into two groups; group 1 compared vitamin D3 supplementation and exercise training versus exercise alone (describing the additive effect of vitamin D3 supplementation when combined with resistance exercise training) and group 2 compared vitamin D3 supplementation and exercise training versus vitamin D3 supplementation alone (describing the additive effect of resistance exercise training when combined with vitamin D3 supplementation). Meta-analyses for group 1 found muscle strength of the lower limb to be significantly improved within the intervention group (0.98, 95% CI 0.73 to 1.24, p<0.001); all other outcomes showed small but non-significant positive effects for the intervention group. The short physical performance battery (SPPB), timed up and go (TUG), muscle strength of the lower limb and femoral neck bone mineral density showed significantly greater improvements in the intervention group for group 2 comparisons. Conclusions This review provides tentative support for the additive effect of resistance exercise and vitamin D3 supplementation for the improvement of muscle strength in older adults. For other functional variables, such as SPPB and TUG, no additional benefit beyond exercise was shown. Further evidence is required to draw firm conclusions or make explicit recommendations regarding combined exercise and vitamin D3 supplementation.

열 자극 후 저강도 근력 트레이닝이 여성 노인의 하지 근골격계 및 성장관련인자에 미치는 영향

Number of 

Key takeaways:Low-intensity strength training after heat stress positively affects lower extremity musculoskeletal system and growth factors in older women as well as moderate strength training.

Abstract:The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of low-intensity strength training after heat stress on lower extremity musculoskeletal system and growth related factors in older women. Fifteen older women without any medical problems were randomly assigned to low-intensity strength training after heat stress group(LSTHS group, n=8) and moderate strength training(MST, n=7). Before the experiment, subjects participated in one repetition maximum test. Also, knee joint’s isokinetic muscle testing using the Isokinetic dynamometer(Biodex system 3, New York, USA) and the cross-sectional area(CSA) of the femur was measured using a computed tomography machine(Somatom Plus 4, SIEMENS, Germany) were measured before and after exercise treatment. Resting blood samples were assessed before and after the exercise treatment. As a results, there was no significant difference in HSP72 level and isokinetic strength between group and time, respectively. IGFBP-3 and IGF-1 level were significantly increased after training compared with before training, respectively. In addition, quardriceps muscle CSA were significantly increased after training compared with before training, while, femur CSA was no significant difference between group and time. In conclusion, low-intensity strength training after heat stress has a positive effect on lower extremity musculoskeletal system and growth related factors as well as moderate strength training.

Intelligent Physical Exercise Training in a Workplace Setting Improves Muscle Strength and Musculoskeletal Pain: A Randomized Controlled Trial

Number of 

Key takeaways:Intelligent Physical Exercise Training (IPET) in a workplace setting improves muscle strength, but not musculoskeletal pain, but within-group reductions in pain are seen in both training groups and control groups.

Abstract:Purpose To assess effects of 1-year Intelligent Physical Exercise Training (IPET) on musculoskeletal health. Methods Office workers were randomized 1 : 1 to a training group, TG (N = 193), or a control group, CG (N = 194). TG received 1 h supervised high intensity IPET every week within working hours for 1 year and was recommended to perform 30 min of moderate intensity physical activity for 6 days a week during leisure. The IPET program was based on baseline health measures. Results No baseline differences were present. An intention-to-treat analysis showed significant between-group effect for muscle strength but not for musculoskeletal pain. However, a per-protocol analysis of those with an adherence of ≥70% demonstrated a significant between-group effect for neck pain during the past three months. Several significant within-group changes were present, where TG and TG ≥ 70% demonstrated clinically relevant pain reductions whereas minimal reductions were seen for CG. Conclusion IPET and recommendations of moderate intensity physical activity demonstrated significant between-group effect on muscle strength. Interestingly, significant within-group reductions in musculoskeletal pain were seen not only in TG but also in CG. This may underlie the lack of such between-group effect and shows that a possible positive side effect of merely drawing attention can improve musculoskeletal health.

Effects of eccentric strength training on motor function in individuals with stroke: a scoping review

Number of 

Key takeaways:Eccentric strength training (ECC) has a greater and positive effect on motor function in individuals with stroke compared to concentric training, physical therapy, and daily routine, but the evidence is low certainty due to limited studies and variability.

Abstract:Abstract Background Preliminary evidence suggests that eccentric strength training (ECC) improves muscle strength and postural control in individuals with stroke; however, the evidence about the effects of ECC in people living with stroke has not been systematically analyzed. Objective To determine the effects of ECC, compared to other exercise modalities (i.e., concentric training), on motor function in individuals with stroke. Methods This scoping review was performed according to PRISMA extension for scoping reviews. Until March 2023, a comprehensive search of studies using ECC intervention to improve motor functions in individuals with stroke was performed. Study designs included were randomized and non-randomized controlled trials and quasi-experimental studies using MEDLINE, Web of Science, Rehabilitation & Sports Medicine, PEDro, and OTSeeker databases. Two independent reviewers selected articles based on title and abstract and extracted relevant information from the eligible studies. The results were qualitatively synthesized, and the critical appraisal was performed using the Rob 2.0 and Robins-I tools. Results Ten studies, with 257 individuals, were analyzed. ECC revealed positive effects on muscle strength, muscular activity, balance, gait speed, and functionality, mainly compared with concentric training, physical therapy, and daily routine. No significant adverse events were reported during ECC. The critical appraisal of individual articles ranged from some to high concern. Conclusion ECC had a greater and positive effect on motor function in individuals with stroke than other exercise modalities. However, the limited number of studies, variability of outcomes, and the risk of bias produced a low certainty of evidence.

The Role of Musculoskeletal Training During Return to Performance Following Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Musculoskeletal training, including resistance training and high-impact plyometric-based exercise, can effectively improve bone health and strength performance in athletes recovering from relative energy deficiency in sport.

Abstract:BACKGROUND
Relative energy deficiency in sport (REDs) is a condition that is associated with negative health and performance outcomes in athletes. Insufficient energy intake relative to exercise energy expenditure, resulting in low energy availability, is the underlying cause, which triggers numerous adverse physiological consequences including several associated with musculoskeletal (MSK) health and neuromuscular performance.

PURPOSE
This commentary aims to (1) discuss the health and performance implications of REDs on the skeletal and neuromuscular systems and (2) examine the role that MSK training (ie, strength and plyometric training) during treatment and return to performance following REDs might have on health and performance in athletes, with practical guidelines provided.

CONCLUSIONS
REDs is associated with decreases in markers of bone health, lean body mass, maximal and explosive strength, and muscle work capacity. Restoration of optimal energy availability, mainly through an increase in energy intake, is the primary goal during the initial treatment of REDs with a return to performance managed by a multidisciplinary team of specialists. MSK training is an effective nonpharmacological component of treatment for REDs, which offers multiple long-term health and performance benefits, assuming the energy needs of athletes are met as part of their recovery. Supervised, prescribed, and gradually progressive MSK training should include a combination of resistance training and high-impact plyometric-based exercise to promote MSK adaptations, with an initial focus on achieving movement competency. Progressing MSK training exercises to higher intensities will have the greatest effects on bone health and strength performance in the long term.

Chronic resistance training: is it time to rethink the time course of neural contributions to strength gain?

Number of 

Key takeaways:Chronic resistance training contributes to neural plasticity in the brain and spinal cord, potentially enhancing strength gains over time.

Abstract:Resistance training enhances muscular force due to a combination of neural plasticity and muscle hypertrophy. It has been well documented that the increase in strength over the first few weeks of resistance training (i.e. acute) has a strong underlying neural component and further enhancement in strength with long-term (i.e. chronic) resistance training is due to muscle hypertrophy. For obvious reasons, collecting long-term data on how chronic-resistance training affects the nervous system not feasible. As a result, the effect of chronic-resistance training on neural plasticity is less understood and has not received systematic exploration. Thus, the aim of this review is to provide rationale for investigating neural plasticity beyond acute-resistance training. We use cross-sectional work to highlight neural plasticity that occurs with chronic-resistance training at sites from the brain to spinal cord. Specifically, intra-cortical circuitry and the spinal motoneuron seem to be key sites for this plasticity. We then urge the need to further investigate the differential effects of acute versus chronic-resistance training on neural plasticity, and the role of this plasticity in increased strength. Such investigations may help in providing a clearer definition of the continuum of acute and chronic-resistance training, how the nervous system is altered during this continuum and the causative role of neural plasticity in changes in strength over the continuum of resistance training.

The Effect of Strength Training on Performance in Endurance Athletes

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training improves economy, vV˙O2max/wV˙O2max, muscle power, and performance in competitive endurance athletes.

Abstract:BackgroundEconomy, velocity/power at maximal oxygen uptake (\( {\text {v}} \dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } /{\text w}\dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } \)) and endurance-specific muscle power tests (i.e. maximal anaerobic running velocity; vMART), are now thought to be the best performance predictors in elite endurance athletes. In addition to cardiovascular function, these key performance indicators are believed to be partly dictated by the neuromuscular system. One technique to improve neuromuscular efficiency in athletes is through strength training.ObjectiveThe aim of this systematic review was to search the body of scientific literature for original research investigating the effect of strength training on performance indicators in well-trained endurance athletes—specifically economy, \( {\text{v}}\dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } /\,{\text{w}}\dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } \) and muscle power (vMART).MethodsA search was performed using the MEDLINE, PubMed, ScienceDirect, SPORTDiscus and Web of Science search engines. Twenty-six studies met the inclusion criteria (athletes had to be trained endurance athletes with ≥6 months endurance training, training ≥6 h per week OR \( \dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } \) ≥50 mL/min/kg, the strength interventions had to be ≥5 weeks in duration, and control groups used). All studies were reviewed using the PEDro scale.ResultsThe results showed that strength training improved time-trial performance, economy, \( {\text{v}}\dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } /{\text{w}}\dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } \) and vMART in competitive endurance athletes.ConclusionThe present research available supports the addition of strength training in an endurance athlete’s programme for improved economy, \( {\text{v}}\dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } /{\text{w}}\dot{V}{\text{O}}_{2 \, \hbox{max} } \), muscle power and performance. However, it is evident that further research is needed. Future investigations should include valid strength assessments (i.e. squats, jump squats, drop jumps) through a range of velocities (maximal-strength ↔ strength-speed ↔ speed-strength ↔ reactive-strength), and administer appropriate strength programmes (exercise, load and velocity prescription) over a long-term intervention period (>6 months) for optimal transfer to performance.

Corticospinal responses following strength training: a systematic review and meta‐analysis

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training leads to increased strength and reduced intracortical inhibition and cortical silent period duration, indicating neural adaptations in the primary motor cortex and corticospinal pathway.

Abstract:Strength training results in changes in skeletal muscle; however, changes in the central nervous system also occur. Over the last 15 years, non‐invasive brain stimulation techniques, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation, have been used to study the neural adaptations to strength training. This review explored the hypothesis that the neural adaptations to strength training may be due to changes in corticospinal excitability and inhibition and, such changes, contribute to the gain in strength following strength training. A systematic review, according to PRISMA guidelines, identified studies by database searching, hand‐searching and citation tracking between January 1990 and the first week of February 2017. Methodological quality of included studies was determined using the Downs and Black quality index. Data were synthesised and interpreted from meta‐analysis. Nineteen studies investigating the corticospinal responses following strength training were included. Meta‐analysis found that strength training increased strength , decreased short‐interval intracortical inhibition (SMD −1.00, 95% CI −1.84 to −0.17) and decreased the cortical silent period (SMD −0.66, 95% CI −1.00 to −0.32). Strength training had no effect on motor threshold (SMD −0.12, 95% CI −0.49 to 0.25), but a borderline effect for increased corticospinal excitability (SMD 0.27, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.54). In untrained healthy participants, the corticospinal response to strength training is characterised by reduced intracortical inhibition and cortical silent period duration, rather than changes in corticospinal excitability. These data demonstrate that strength training targets intracortical inhibitory networks within the primary motor cortex (M1) and corticospinal pathway, characterising an important neural adaptation to strength training.

Muscle onset can be improved by therapeutic exercise: a systematic review.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Therapeutic exercise, particularly isolated muscle training, can improve muscle onset timing in people with musculoskeletal pathology.

The Systemic Effects of Blood Flow Restriction Training: A Systematic Review

Number of 

Key takeaways:Blood flow restriction training may have positive or non-detrimental effects on cardiovascular, endocrine, and musculoskeletal systems, with mixed effects on psychosocial outcomes.

Abstract:Background Blood flow restriction (BFR) training has been reported to have significant benefits on local skeletal muscle including increasing local muscle mass, strength, and endurance while exercising with lower resistance. As a result, patients unable to perform traditional resistance training may benefit from this technique. However, it is unclear what effects BFR may have on other body systems, such as the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems. It is important to explore the systemic effects of BFR training to ensure it is safe for use in physical therapy. Purpose The purpose of this study was to systematically review the systemic effects of blood flow restriction training when combined with exercise intervention. Study Design Systematic review. Methods Three literature searches were performed: June 2019, September 2019, and January 2020; using MedLine, ScienceDirect, PubMed, Cochrane Reviews and CINAHL Complete. Inclusion criteria included: at least one outcome measure addressing a cardiovascular, endocrinological, systemic or proximal musculoskeletal, or psychosocial outcome, use of clinically available blood flow restriction equipment, use of either resistance or aerobic training in combination with BFR, and use of quantitative measures. Exclusion criteria for articles included only measuring local or distal musculoskeletal changes due to BFR training, examining only passive BFR or ischemic preconditioning, articles not originating from a scholarly peer-reviewed journal, CEBM level of evidence less than two, or PEDro score less than four. Articles included in this review were analyzed with the CEBM levels of evidence hierarchy and PEDro scale. Results Thirty-five articles were included in the review. PEDro scores ranged between 4 and 8, and had CEBM levels of evidence of 1 and 2. Common systems studied included cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, endocrine, and psychosocial. This review found positive or neutral effects of blood flow restriction training on cardiovascular, endocrinological, musculoskeletal, and psychosocial outcomes. Conclusions Although BFR prescription parameters and exercise interventions varied, the majority of included articles reported BFR training to produce favorable or non-detrimental effects to the cardiovascular, endocrine, and musculoskeletal systems. This review also found mixed effects on psychosocial outcomes when using BFR. Additionally, this review found no detrimental outcomes directly attributed to blood flow restriction training on the test subjects or outcomes tested. Thus, BFR training may be an effective intervention for patient populations that are unable to perform traditional exercise training with positive effects other than traditional distal muscle hypertrophy and strength and without significant drawbacks to the individual. Level of Evidence 1b

Influence of strength training on selected systems of the human body

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training positively influences various human organ systems, with results largely dependent on factors such as gender, genetic characteristics, age, training history, health status, diet, lifestyle, physical activity, and stress levels.

Abstract:Research aim: The objective of research was to present the influence of strength training on selected systems of human organs on the basis of available literature on the subject.
Methodology: A review was conducted of international literature based on analysis of selected articles available at Google Scholar, PubMed, SciCentral.
Results: Changes in the human body as a result of both strength exercises and training were demonstrated based on analysis of the available literature.
Summary: The results and the rate of benefiting from the practive of strength disciplines largely depend on gender, genetic characteristics, age, training history, health status, diet, lifestyle, current physical activity and stress levels.

Effects of Strength Training on BDNF in Healthy Young Adults

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training has inconclusive positive effects on BDNF in healthy young adults aged 18-30 years.

Abstract:The physical improvements from strength and resistance training have been known for decades, but the cognitive benefits of this type of activity are not as well-known. The aim of this review article is to provide a summary of studies presenting the effects of strength and resistance training on BDNF in healthy young adults. A systematic search of various electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Science Direct and Google Scholar) was conducted in September 2022. Studies that examined associations between strength training and BDNF in healthy young adults aged 18–30 years were included. The final sample included 10 studies published between 2009 and 2020. The results of this literature review are inconclusive. Based on the results of the 10 studies, there is no clear answer as to whether strength training has positive effects on BDNF in healthy young adults.

Effects of strength training on total and regional body composition in older men.

Number of 

Key takeaways:A 16-week strength-training program significantly increased upper and lower body strength, fat-free mass, and reduced fat mass in older men.

Abstract:The effects of a 16-wk strength-training program on total and regional body composition were assessed by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and hydrodensitometry in 13 untrained healthy men . Nine additional men (62 +/- 6 yr) served as inactive controls. The strength-training program resulted in substantial increases in both upper (39 +/- 8%; P < 0.001) and lower (42 +/- 14%; P < 0.001) body strength. Total fat-free mass (FFM) increased by 2 kg (62.0 +/- 7.1 to 64.0 +/- 7.2 kg; P < 0.001), and total fat mass decreased by the same amount (23.8 +/- 6.7 to 21.8 +/- 6.0 kg; P < 0.001) when measured by DEXA. When measured by hydrodensitometry, similar increases in FFM (61.3 +/- 7.8 to 63.0 +/- 7.6 kg; P < 0.01) and decreases in fat mass (23.8 +/- 7.9 to 22.1 +/- 7.7 kg; P < 0.001) were observed. When measured by DEXA, FFM was increased in the arms (6.045 +/- 0.860 to 6.418 +/- 0.803 kg; P < 0.01), legs (19.416 +/- 2.228 to 20.131 +/- 2.303 kg; P < 0.001), and trunk (29.229 +/- 4.108 to 30.134 +/- 4.184 kg; P < 0.01), whereas fat mass was reduced in the arms (2.383 +/- 0.830 to 2.128 +/- 0.714 kg; P < 0.01), legs (7.583 +/- 1.675 to 6.945 +/- 1.551 kg; P < 0.001), and trunk (12.216 +/- 4.143 to 11.281 +/- 3.653 kg; P < 0.01) as a result of training.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

Effects of Resistance Circuit-Based Training on Body Composition, Strength and Cardiorespiratory Fitness: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Number of 

Key takeaways:Resistance circuit-based training effectively improves body composition, cardiorespiratory fitness, and strength in adults, with greater effects in untrained and active individuals.

Abstract:Simple Summary Resistance circuit-based training is an effective training method to decrease total body fat and increase muscle mass in adults. Resistance circuit-based training promotes concurrent improvements in strength performance and cardiorespiratory fitness variables in adults. If training load is managed properly, a greater effect on body composition and strength adaptations is possible. Regarding 1-RM improvements, the effect of this type of training is influenced by the training status, obtaining greater effects in untrained and active adults, and by the training characteristics, showing a larger effect in protocols with three sessions and a duration of >20 training sessions. For body fat mass decreases, the effect of resistance circuit-based training was significantly greater in protocols that used low (<60% 1-RM) or moderate intensity (60–80% 1-RM) and short periods or rest between exercises (10–30 s). Abstract We assessed the effects of resistance circuit-based training (CT) on strength, cardiorespiratory fitness, and body composition. A systematic review with meta-analysis was conducted in three databases, ending on March, 2020. Meta-analysis and subgroup analysis were used to analyze the effects of pre–post-intervention CT and differences from control groups (CG). Of the 830 studies found, 45 were included in the meta-analysis (58 experimental groups (n = 897) and 34 CG (n = 474)). The CT interventions led to increases in muscle mass (1.9%; p < 0.001) and decreases in fat mass (4.3%; p < 0.001). With regard to cardiorespiratory fitness, CT had a favorable effect on VO2max (6.3%; p < 0.001), maximum aerobic speed or power (0.3%; p = 0.04), and aerobic performance (2.6%; p = 0.006) after training. Concerning strength outcome, the CT increased the strength of the upper and lower extremities. Only the magnitude of strength performance appears to be influenced by the training (number of sessions and frequency) and the training status. Moreover, low and moderate intensities and short rest time between exercise increase the magnitude of change in fat mass loss. Therefore, CT has been shown to be an effective method for improving body composition, cardiorespiratory fitness, and strength of the lower and upper limbs.

Effectiveness of resistance training on body composition, muscle strength, and biomarker in sarcopenic older adults: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Resistance training effectively improves muscle strength and levels of synthetic hormones and anti-inflammatory factors in sarcopenic older adults, with a slight impact on body composition and no impact on pro-inflammatory factors.

The Effects of Resistance Training on Muscular Fitness, Muscle Morphology, and Body Composition in Elite Female Athletes: A Systematic Review

Number of 

Key takeaways:Resistance training or combined with other strength-dominated exercise types significantly increases muscle power, strength, speed, and jump performance in elite female athletes.

Abstract:Well programmed strength and conditioning training is an indispensable part of the long-term training process for athletes in individual and team sports to improve performance and prevent injuries. Yet, there is a limited number of studies available that examine the effects of resistance training (RT) on muscular fitness and physiological adaptations in elite female athletes.This systematic review aimed to summarize recent evidence on the long-term effects of RT or combinations of RT with other strength-dominated exercise types on muscular fitness, muscle morphology, and body composition in female elite athletes.A systematic literature search was conducted in nine electronic databases (Academic Search Elite, CINAHL, ERIC, Open Access Theses and Dissertations, Open Dissertations, PsycINFO, PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, and SPORTDiscus) from inception until March 2022. Key search terms from the MeSH database such as RT and strength training were included and combined using the operators 'AND,' 'OR,' and 'NOT'. The search syntax initially identified 181 records. After screening for titles, abstracts, and full texts, 33 studies remained that examined the long-term effects of RT or combinations of RT with other strength-dominated exercise types on muscular fitness, muscle morphology, and body composition in female elite athletes.Twenty-four studies used single-mode RT or plyometric training and nine studies investigated the effects of combined training programs such as resistance with plyometric or agility training, resistance and speed training, and resistance and power training. The training duration lasted at least 4 weeks, but most studies used ~ 12 weeks. Studies were generally classified as 'high-quality' with a mean PEDro score of 6.8 (median 7). Irrespective of the type or combination of RT with other strength-dominated exercise regimens (type of exercise, exercise duration, or intensity), 24 out of 33 studies reported increases in muscle power (e.g., maximal and mean power; effect size : 0.23 < Cohen's d < 1.83, small to large), strength (e.g., one-repetition-maximum ; ES: 0.15 < d < 6.80, small to very large), speed (e.g., sprint times; ES: 0.01 < d < 1.26, small to large), and jump performance (e.g., countermovement/squat jump; ES: 0.02 < d < 1.04, small to large). The nine studies that examined the effects of combined training showed significant increases on maximal strength (ES: 0.08 < d < 2.41, small to very large), muscle power (ES: 0.08 < d < 2.41, small to very large), jump and sprint performance (ES: 0.08 < d < 2.41, small to very large). Four out of six studies observed no changes in body mass or percentage of body fat after resistance or plyometric training or combined training (ES: 0.026 < d < 0.492, small to medium). Five out of six studies observed significant changes in muscle morphology (e.g., muscle thickness, muscle fiber cross-sectional area; ES: 0.23 < d < 3.21, small to very large). However, one study did not find any changes in muscle morphology (i.e., muscle thickness, pennation angle; ES: 0.1 < d < 0.19, small).Findings from this systematic review suggest that RT or combined RT with other strength-dominated exercise types leads to significant increases in measures of muscle power, strength, speed, and jump performance in elite female athletes. However, the optimal dosage of programming parameters such as training intensity and duration necessary to induce large effects in measures of muscular fitness and their physiological adaptations remain to be resolved in female elite athletes.

Changes in Body Composition and Strength after 12 Weeks of High-Intensity Functional Training with Two Different Loads in Physically Active Men and Women: A Randomized Controlled Study

Number of 

Key takeaways:Twelve weeks of high-intensity functional training with either low or moderate resistance led to similar increases in lean body mass and maximal strength, but different fat loss outcomes.

Abstract:This study examined the effects of two different resistance loads during high-intensity Functional Training (HIFT) on body composition and maximal strength. Thirty-one healthy young individuals were randomly assigned into three groups: moderate load (ML: 70% 1-RM), low load-(LL: 30% 1-RM), and control (CON). Each experimental group performed HIFT three times per week for 12 weeks with a similar total volume load. Body fat decreased equally in both experimental groups after 6 weeks of training (p < 0.001), but at the end of training it further decreased only in LL compared to ML (−3.19 ± 1.59 vs. −1.64 ± 1.44 kg, p < 0.001), with no change in CON (0.29 ± 1.08 kg, p = 0.998). Lean body mass (LBM) increased after 6 weeks of training (p = 0.019) in ML only, while after 12 weeks a similar increase was observed in LL and ML (1.11 ± 0.65 vs. ML: 1.25 ± 1.59 kg, p = 0.034 and 0.013, respectively), with no change in CON (0.34 ± 0.67 kg, p = 0.991). Maximal strength increased similarly in four out of five exercises for both experimental groups by between 9.5% and 16.9% (p < 0.01) at the end of training, with no change in CON (−0.6 to 4.9%, p > 0.465). In conclusion, twelve weeks of HIFT training with either low or moderate resistance and equal volume load resulted in an equal increase in LBM and maximal strength, but different fat loss.

Programming and supervision of resistance training leads to positive effects on strength and body composition: results from two randomised trials of community fitness programmes

Number of 

Key takeaways:Programming and supervision of resistance training significantly improves strength and body composition in sedentary and overweight individuals, potentially benefiting public health.

Abstract:Many sedentary adults have high body fat along with low fitness, strength, and lean body mass (LBM) which are associated with poor health independently of body mass. Physical activity can aid in prevention, management, and treatment of numerous chronic conditions. The potential efficacy of resistance training (RT) in modifying risk factors for cardiovascular and metabolic disease is clear. However, RT is under researched in public health. We report community-based studies of RT in sedentary (Study 1), and overweight and pre-diabetic (Study 2) populations. Study 1 - A semi randomised trial design (48-weeks): Participants choosing either a fitness centre approach, and randomised to structured-exercise (STRUC, n = 107), or free/unstructured gym use (FREE, n = 110), or not, and randomised to physical-activity-counselling (PAC, n = 71) or a measurement only comparator (CONT, n = 76). Study 2 - A randomised wait list controlled trial (12-weeks): Patients were randomly assigned to; traditional-supervised-exercise (STRUC, n = 30), physical-activity-counselling (PAC, n = 23), either combined (COMB, n = 39), or a wait-list comparator (CONT, n = 54). Outcomes for both were BF mass (kg), LBM (kg), BF percentage (%), and strength. Study 1: One-way ANCOVA revealed significant between group effects for BF% and LBM, but not for BF mass or strength. Post hoc paired comparisons revealed significantly greater change in LBM for the STRUC group compared with the CONT group. Within group changes using 95%CIs revealed significant changes only in the STRUC group for both BF% (− 4.1 to − 0.9%) and LBM (0.1 to 4.5 kg), and in FREE (8.2 to 28.5 kg) and STRUC (5.9 to 26.0 kg) for strength. Study 2: One-way ANCOVA did not reveal significant between group effects for strength, BF%, BF mass, or LBM. For strength, 95%CIs revealed significant within group changes for the STRUC (2.4 to 14.1 kg) and COMB (3.7 to 15.0 kg) groups. Strength increased in both studies across all RT treatments compared to controls, yet significant improvements in both strength and body-composition occurred only in programmed and/or supervised RT. As general increases in physical activity have limited impact upon body-composition, public health practitioners should structure interventions to include progressive RT. Study 1: ISRCTN13024854 , retrospectively registered 20/02/2018. Study 2: ISRCTN13509468 , retrospectively registered 20/02/2018).

Effects of Strength Training on Physical Function: Influence of Power, Strength, and Body Composition

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training improves physical function in daily activities, with changes in strength, power, and fat-free mass being predictors of these improvements.

Abstract:Hanson, ED, Srivatsan, SR, Agrawal, S, Menon, KS, Delmonico, MJ, Wang, MQ, and H

EFFECTS OF COMBINED TRAINING ON BODY COMPOSITION, MUSCLE STRENGTH AND AEROBIC POWER IN WOMEN: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW AND META-ANALYSIS

Number of 

Key takeaways:Combined Training programs promote increases in aerobic power and muscular strength, and significantly improve body composition in healthy women, regardless of the protocol used.

Abstract:This systematic review and meta-analysis verified the effects of different Combined Training (CT) programs on body composition, aerobic power and muscle strength performance in healthy women. A bibliographic search was performed in the following electronic databases: Medline, PubMed, Lilacs, Plataforma Capes and EMBASE from the oldest registry until November 2023. 14 eligible articles were found that met the following criteria: original randomized articles and non-randomized comparatives; experimental CT studies with at least four weeks of intervention and with healthy adult women (>18 years); studies with the Control Group (CG) that restricted the practice of physical exercises; that analyzed at least one of the outcomes related to muscle strength, body composition (fat mass and lean mass) and aerobic power (VO2). We compared CT versus GC applying a random effects meta-analysis model. We estimated the standardized mean difference (SMD) for each group (CT and GC) comparing pre-post results. According to the results of the meta-analysis, all the variables analyzed were favorable to the CT compared to the CG, but Body Mass (SMD=0.05;CI: -0,02-0,13) and Aerobic Power (SMD=1.34; CI: -0,04-2,72) were not significant. Fat Mass (SMD=0.22; CI:
0.09-0.35), muscle strength (SMD= 0.83; CI: 0.59-1.41), and muscle mass (SMD=0.34; CI: 0.22-0.47) showed significant changes. These results suggest that the training models promoted increases in aerobic power and muscular strength, and significantly improved body composition compared to control group, regardless of the protocol used.

Effects of Functional Strength Training Combined with Aerobic Training on Body Composition, Physical Fitness, and Movement Quality in Obese Adolescents

Number of 

Key takeaways:Functional strength training combined with aerobic training is more effective than traditional resistance training combined with aerobic training in improving body composition, physical fitness, and movement quality in obese adolescents.

Abstract:This study aimed to compare the effects of 12 weeks of functional strength training combined with aerobic training (TG) and traditional resistance training combined with aerobic training (CG) on the body composition, physical fitness, and movement quality of obese adolescents. Forty participants were randomly assigned to either the TG group (n = 20) or the CG group (n = 20). Each group underwent training five times per week, lasting 120 min each time, over a total period of 12 weeks. All participants followed a strict dietary program. Anthropometric parameters, body composition, physical fitness, and movement quality were evaluated at baseline and after intervention. A two-way repeated measures ANOVA observed a significant interaction between time and group for body mass (p = 0.043), body fat percentage (p = 0.045), body mass index (p = 0.025), neck circumference (p = 0.01), chest circumference (p = 0.027), left-hand grip strength (p = 0.043), right-hand grip strength (p = 0.048), standing broad jump (p = 0.044), and total Functional Movement Screen score (p = 0.003), and the improvement was greater for TG in comparison to CG. TG was found to be more effective than CG in enhancing body composition, physical fitness, and movement quality in obese adolescents.

Comparison of changes in lean body mass with a strength- versus muscle endurance-based resistance training program

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength-type resistance training showed significant increases in lean body mass, but no significant differences were found between strength and endurance-type training over an 8-week period.

Abstract:PurposeThe aim of this study was to compare the effects of resistance training (RT) with an emphasis on either muscular strength-type RT or muscular endurance-type RT on measures of body composition.MethodsTwenty-five resistance-trained men (age 28.4 ± 6.4 years; body mass 75.9 ± 8.4 kg; height 176.9 ± 7.5 cm) were randomly assigned to either a strength-type RT group that performed three sets of 6–8 repetition maximum (RM) with 3-min rest (n = 10), an endurance-type RT group that performed three sets of 20–25 RM with a 60-s rest interval (n = 10), or a control group (n = 5, CG). All groups completed each set until muscular failure and were supervised to follow a hyperenergetic diet (39 kcal·kg^−1·day^−1). Body composition changes were measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry.ResultsAfter 8 weeks, we found significant increases in total body mass (0.9 kg; p < 0.05; ES = < 0.2) and lean body mass (LBM) (1.3 kg; p < 0.05; ES = 0.31) only in the strength-type RT group; however, no significant interactions were noted between groups.ConclusionsAlthough only strength-type RT showed statistically significant increases in LBM from baseline, no between-group differences were noted for any body composition outcome. These findings suggest that LBM gains in resistance trained are not significantly influenced by the type of training stimulus over an 8-week training period.

Effects of Endurance and Endurance Strength Training on Body Composition and Physical Capacity in Women with Abdominal Obesity

Number of 

Key takeaways:Endurance and endurance strength training both have a favorable and comparable effect on anthropometric parameters, body composition, physical capacity, and circulatory system function in women with abdominal obesity.

Abstract:Aims: To compare the effects of endurance training with endurance strength training on the anthropometric, body composition, physical capacity, and circulatory parameters in obese women. Methods: 44 women with abdominal obesity were randomized into groups A and B, and asked to perform endurance (A) and endurance strength training (B) for 3 months, 3 times/week, for 60 min. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry and Graded Exercise Test were performed before and after training. Results: Significant decreases in body mass, BMI, total body fat, total body fat mass, and waist and hip circumference were observed after both types of intervention. Marked increases in total body lean and total body fat-free mass were documented in group B. In both groups, significant increases in peak oxygen uptake, time to exhaustion, maximal work rate, and work rate at ventilatory threshold were accompanied by noticeably decreased resting heart rate, resting systolic blood pressure, and resting and exercise diastolic blood pressure. No significant differences were noticed between groups for the investigated parameters. Conclusion: Our findings demonstrate evidence for a favorable and comparable effect of 3-month endurance and endurance strength training on anthropometric parameters, body composition, physical capacity, and circulatory system function in women with abdominal obesity.

Effects of Exercise Type on Muscle Strength and Body Composition in Men and Women: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Number of 

Key takeaways:Concurrent training is the most effective exercise for men, increasing muscle strength, lean mass, and reducing fat mass, while resistance training is most effective for women.

Abstract:Background and Objectives: There are typical differences in body composition and distribution of muscle fiber types between women and men. However, research investigating the effects of exercise based on sex differences is limited, and studies examining sex differences in physiological adaptations according to exercise type are scarce. We aimed to compare the effects of exercise types on muscle strength and body composition in men and women through a meta-analysis. Materials and Methods: A systematic literature search was conducted using the PubMed/Medline, Web of Science, CINAHL, and EBSCO databases. Keywords included “endurance training”, “resistance training”, “concurrent training”, “muscle strength”, “body composition”, “sex characteristics”, and “men and women”. The standardized mean difference (SMD) was presented separately for men and women based on the pre- and post-intervention values for each exercise type. Results: Concurrent training showed the greatest effect on the increase in leg press muscle strength in men, and resistance training showed the greatest effect in women. Concurrent training showed the greatest effect size in both men and women in increasing bench press muscle strength. Resistance training and concurrent training showed a small effect size on lean mass reduction in both men and women. Endurance training and concurrent training significantly reduced fat mass in men. However, no significant changes in fat mass were observed in any exercise type among women. Conclusions: Concurrent training is the most efficient type of exercise for men, as it is effective in increasing upper- and lower-body muscle strength, increasing lean mass, and reducing fat mass. Resistance training is most effective in increasing muscle strength in females, whereas endurance training is most effective in reducing fat mass. However, it is difficult to corroborate these results because of the lack of study samples included in the analysis and the differences in exercise methods, participant age, and exercise duration.

The Effects of Different Exercise Training Types on Body Composition and Physical Performance in Older Adults with Sarcopenic Obesity: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Number of 

Key takeaways:Resistance training effectively reduces body fat and improves lower limb strength in older adults with sarcopenic obesity, while low certainty exists for upper limb strength.

Abstract:Objectives To carry out a systematic review and meta-analysis to verify the effects of different exercise training types on body composition and physical performance in older adults with sarcopenic obesity (SO). Design Systematic review and meta-analysis. Setting and Participants Older adults (≥60 years). Methods Database searches were performed in MEDLINE (via PubMed), EMBASE, Cochrane Library, Web of Science, SCOPUS, and LILACS on January 10th, 2023. We included: randomized and/or controlled clinical trials; physical exercise as an intervention; analysis of body composition and/or muscle function; and sarcopenic obesity diagnosis. We used the Risk of Bias 2 tool and PEDro scale. The GRADE certainty of evidence was also performed. Results Fourteen studies were included in the systematic review and nine studies in the meta-analysis. A decrease in body fat (%) favoring the exercise group was identified (SMD: −0.34 ; p=0.0003) (GRADE: ⊕⊕⊕○ Moderate). Only resistance training showed fat reduction (SMD: −0.27 ; p=0.01). Increases in upper (SMD: 0.41 ; p=0.03) (GRADE: ⊕⊕○○ Low) and lower (SMD: 0.80 ; p=0.007) (GRADE: ⊕⊕⊕⊕ High) limb strength was identified with exercise. Chair stand test showed increases with exercise (SMD: 0.73 ; p<0.0001) (GRADE ⊕⊕⊕⊕ High), especially for resistance training (SMD: 0.62 ; p=0.003) and combined training (SMD: 0.99 ; p=0.0005). The PEDro scale for the studies in our review ranged from 3 to 8 (mean = 5.8 (1.6)), meaning fair methodological quality, and most studies were overall judged with at least low/some concerns in terms of risk of bias. Conclusion and Implications Overall, moderate to high certainty of evidence was found for body fat, lower limb strength, and chair stand test. On the other hand, low certainty of evidence was found for upper limb strength. Resistance, combined, and aerobic training evoked divergent results between the variables analyzed. Although promising, our results should be considered sparingly, but may guide additional exercise recommendations to improve specific health parameters in older adults with SO.

A pilot study of the effects of supervised exercise training on body composition, cardiometabolic risk factors, muscle strength and functional capacity in individuals with bariatric surgery

Number of 

Key takeaways:Personalized and supervised functional exercise training positively impacts body composition, cardiometabolic risk factors, muscle strength, and functional capacity in bariatric surgery patients.

High-intensity interval training among middle-aged and older adults for body composition and muscle strength: A systematic review

Number of 

Key takeaways:HIIT effectively improves body composition and increases muscle strength in middle-aged and older adults, but its comparative effectiveness to moderate-intensity continuous training remains unclear due to limited research.

Abstract:Background The aging of population is leading to the investigation of new options to achieve healthy aging. One of these options is high-intensity interval training (HIIT), although its effects on body composition and muscle strength are currently unclear. The objective of this systematic review is to examine the scientific publications on the effects of HIIT on the body composition and muscle strength of middle-aged and older adults. Methods The search was carried out in the PubMed, Cochrane Plus, Web of Science, CINAHL and SciELO databases without limitation of publication dates. The literature search, data extraction and systematic review were performed following the PRISMA standards and the risk of bias of the selected studies was assessed using the Cochrane Collaboration Risk-of-Bias. Results Initially 520 publications were identified, out of which a total of 8 articles were finally selected to be included in this systematic review. Improvements in body composition were seen in six of the selected items and an increase in muscle strength in seven of the eight. Regarding physical function, improvements were found in both gait speed and balance. Conclusions This systematic review found that HIIT is effective in improving body composition and increasing muscle strength. However, when comparing HIIT to moderate-intensity continuous training, it is not clear that HIIT is more beneficial; a firm conclusion cannot be drawn due to the scarcity of published studies, their variety in methodology and the ambiguity of their results, so it is suggested to carry out more research in this area.

The Impact of Exercise Training on Psychological Outcomes, Body Composition, and Quality of Life in Overweight or Obese Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials

Number of 

Key takeaways:Exercise training positively impacts psychological outcomes, body composition, and multiple quality of life domains in overweight and obese adults.

Abstract:Background: Overweight and obesity are associated with adverse psychological outcomes, compromised body composition, and reduced quality of life (QoL). While exercise training has been proposed as an effective intervention, its impact on these outcomes remains unclear. Objective: This systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated the effects of exercise training on psychological outcomes, body composition, and QoL in overweight or obese adults. Methods: A systematic review and meta-analysis were performed through July 2024, utilizing multiple databases. Random-effects models were used to calculate standardized mean differences (SMDs) or mean differences (MDs), with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Results: Thirty-one trials involving 2779 participants were included. Exercise training significantly improved mental health (SMD: 0.25, 95% CI: 0.11, 0.39, p = .0003), depression (SMD: -0.52, 95% CI: -0.86, -0.18, p = .003), mood (SMD: 7.55, 95% CI: 10.78, 4.31, p < .00001), waist circumference (MD: -2.77 cm, 95% CI: -4.60, -0.94, p = .003), and lean body mass (MD: 1.16 kg, 95% CI: 0.62, 1.69, p < .0001). Improvements were also observed in various QoL domains, including social functioning (p = .004), physical functioning (p < .00001), vitality (p = .003), general health (p = .001), and environmental quality (p < .00001). However, some psychological, body composition, and QoL variables did not show significant effects. Conclusion: Exercise training positively impacts psychological outcomes, body composition, and multiple QoL domains in overweight and obese adults. These findings highlight the importance of exercise in lifestyle interventions. Further research is needed to determine long-term and consistent effects.

The effects of exercise training on body composition in postmenopausal women: a systematic review and meta-analysis

Number of 

Key takeaways:Exercise training effectively improves body composition in postmenopausal women, with aerobic training promoting fat loss and resistance training promoting muscle gain.

Abstract:Introduction We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to investigate the effect of exercise training on body composition outcomes in postmenopausal women. Methods PubMed, Web of Science, CINAHL, and Medline were searched to identify the randomized controlled trials which evaluated effect of exercise training versus control in postmenopausal women. Standardized mean differences (SMD), weighted mean differences (WMD) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) were calculated using random effects model. Results One hundred and one studies involving 5,697 postmenopausal women were included in the meta-analysis. Results indicated that exercise training effectively increased muscle mass/ volume, muscle and fiber cross-sectional area and fat-free mass, and decreased fat mass, body fat percentage, waist circumference and visceral fat. Furthermore, subgroup analyses results revealed that aerobic and combined training had greater beneficial effects on fat mass outcomes, whereas resistance and combined training had greater beneficial effects on muscle mass outcomes. Discussion Overall, our results revealed that exercise training is effective for improving body composition in postmenopausal women. To be specific, aerobic training is effective on fat loss, whereas resistance training is effective on muscle gain. However, combination of aerobic and resistance trainings may be considered a viable strategy to improve body composition in postmenopausal women. Systematic review registration identifier CRD42021283425.

Effects of a ketogenic diet on body composition and strength in trained women

Number of 

Key takeaways:A ketogenic diet may help decrease fat mass and maintain fat-free mass in trained women after eight weeks of resistance training, but is suboptimal for increasing fat-free mass.

Abstract:The effect of ketogenic diets (KD) on body composition in different populations has been investigated. More recently, some have recommended that athletes adhere to ketogenic diets in order to optimize changes in body composition during training. However, there is less evidence related to trained women. We aimed to evaluate the effect of a KD on body composition and strength in trained women following an eight-week resistance training (RT) program. Twenty-one strength-trained women (27.6 ± 4.0 years; 162.1 ± 6.6 cm; 62.3 ± 7.8 kg; 23.7 ± 2.9 kg·m− 2) were randomly assigned to either a non-KD group (n = 11, NKD) or a KD group (n = 10, KD). Study outcomes included body composition as measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), strength levels measured using one maximum repetition (RM) in back squat and bench press (BP), and countermovement jump (CMJ) measured on a force plate. A significant reduction in fat mass was observed in KD (− 1.1 ± 1.5 kg; P = 0.042; d = − 0.2) but not in NDK (0.3 ± 0.8 kg; P = 0.225; d = 0.1). No significant changes in fat-free mass were observed in KD (− 0.7 ± 1.7 kg; P = 0.202; d = − 0.1) or NKD (0.7 ± 1.1 kg; P = 0.074; d = 0.2), but absolute changes favored NKD. No significant changes in BP were observed in KD (1.5 ± 4.6 kg; P = 0.329; d = 0.2), although significant changes were noted in the squat and CMJ (5.6 ± 7.6 kg; P = 0.045; d = 0.5 and 1.7 ± 1.9 cm; P = 0.022; d = 0.6, respectively). In contrast, NKD showed significant increases in BP (4.8 ± 1.8; P < 0.01; d = 0.7), squat (15.6 ± 5.4 kg; P = 0.005; d = 1.4) and CMJ (2.2 ± 1.7 cm; P = 0.001; d = 0.5). Findings indicate that a KD may help to decrease fat mass and maintain fat-free mass after eight 8 weeks of RT in trained-women but is suboptimal for increasing fat-free mass.

Effect of Time-Restricted Eating and Resistance Training on High-Speed Strength and Body Composition

Number of 

Key takeaways:Time-restricted eating and resistance training combined may improve upper body high-speed strength, but not lower body performance, in already trained young males.

Abstract:This study examined the effects of four weeks of resistance training combined with time-restricted eating (TRE) vs. habitual diet on fat and fat-free mass as well as maximum and explosive force production in healthy, trained participants (18 males, aged 23.7 ± 2.6 years). The order of dieting was randomized and counterbalanced, and the participants served as their own controls. TRE involved an 8-h eating window and non-TRE involved a habitual meal pattern. Participants completed performance strength tests and body composition scans at baseline and post-intervention. The participants followed a structured training routine during each dietary intervention (four sets of maximum repetitions at 85% 1RM in five dynamic exercises, three times/week). Both interventions elicited deceases in fat mass (p < 0.05) but not in fat-free mass. After training (controlling for baseline values as covariates), non-TRE was compatible with better lower body jump performance than TRE (p < 0.05). Conversely, training with TRE elicited higher values in terms of peak force and dynamic strength index at the level of the upper body (p < 0.05). Thus, it can be concluded that there were no differences in fat mass and fat-free mass changes between interventions in already trained young males. Additionally, while the combination of TRE and resistance training might be beneficial for individuals focusing on developing high-speed strength performance at the upper body level, this is not applicable to those focusing on training the lower body.

The effect of endurance and endurance-strength training on body composition and cardiometabolic markers in abdominally obese women: a randomised trial

Number of 

Key takeaways:Both endurance and endurance-strength training improve body composition in abdominally obese women, but endurance training reduces paraoxonase activity and myoglobin levels and is more effective in reducing blood pressure.

Effect of Strength Training on Bone Density in Postmenopausal Women in Germany

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training significantly enhances bone density in postmenopausal women, particularly in the lumbar spine and femoral neck regions, and combined with proper nutrition can reduce osteoporosis risk.

Abstract:Purpose: The aim of the study was to analyze the effect of strength training on bone density in postmenopausal women in Germany. 
Methodology: This study adopted a desk methodology. A desk study research design is commonly known as secondary data collection. This is basically collecting data from existing resources preferably because of its low cost advantage as compared to a field research. Our current study looked into already published studies and reports as the data was easily accessed through online journals and libraries. 
Findings:  Strength training significantly enhances bone density in postmenopausal women, particularly in the lumbar spine and femoral neck regions. High-intensity resistance exercises have shown to be especially effective in promoting bone health and reducing the risk of osteoporosis. Structured training programs, including weight-bearing exercises, have demonstrated a notable reduction in bone loss rates. Additionally, combining strength training with proper nutrition, such as increased calcium and vitamin D intake, amplifies the positive effects on bone density. 
Unique Contribution to Theory, Practice and Policy: Mechanotransductionx theory, load-bearing theory may be used to anchor future studies on the effect of strength training on bone density in postmenopausal women in Germany. Healthcare providers and fitness professionals should integrate strength training into the routine care of postmenopausal women. Policymakers should advocate for stronger support of strength training as part of public health initiatives targeting osteoporosis prevention and treatment in postmenopausal women.

Influence of two strength training modalities (hypertrophy vs. contrast training) on muscular strength, bone health parameters and quality of life in a group of older adults with low skeletal muscle mass index.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Both hypertrophy and contrast training improve maximal strength, physical performance, and quality of life in older adults with low skeletal muscle mass index, but do not significantly affect bone mineral density or content.

Strength training increases regional bone mineral density and bone remodeling in middle-aged and older men.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training improves bone mineral density in the femoral neck and lumbar spine of middle-aged and older men, promoting bone remodeling.

Abstract:To determine the effects of strength training (ST) on bone mineral density (BMD) and bone remodeling, 18 previously inactive untrained males were studied before and after 16 wk of either ST (n = 11) or no exercise (inactive controls; n = 7). Total, spinal (L2-L4), and femoral neck BMD were measured in nine training and seven control subjects before and after the experimental period. Serum concentrations of osteocalcin, skeletal alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme, and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase were measured before, during, and after the experimental program in all subjects. Training increased muscular strength by an average of 45 +/- 3% (P < 0.001) on a three-repetition maximum test and by 32 +/- 4% (P < 0.001) on an isokinetic test of the knee extensors performed at 60 degrees/s. BMD increased in the femoral neck by 3.8 +/- 1.0% (0.900 +/- 0.05 vs. 0.933 +/- 0.05 g/cm2, P < 0.05) and in the lumbar spine by 2.0 +/- 0.9% (1.180 +/- 0.06 vs. 1.203 +/- 0.06 g/cm2, P < 0.05). However, changes in lumbar spine BMD were not significantly different from those in the control group. There was no significant change in total body BMD. Osteocalcin increased by 19 +/- 6% after 12 wk of training (P < 0.05) and remained significantly elevated after 16 wk of training (P < 0.05). There was a 26 +/- 11% increase in skeletal alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme levels (P < 0.05) after 16 wk of training.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

Muscle training for bone strength

Number of 

Key takeaways:Resistance muscle training may be more effective in maintaining bone mass and architecture, and may reduce fracture risk and improve functional ability in osteoporotic patients.

Abstract:The main function of bone is to provide the mechanical integrity for locomotion and protection; accordingly, bone mass and architecture are adjusted to control the strains produced by mechanical load and muscular activity. Age-related patterns involve peak bone mass during growth, a plateau in adulthood, and bone loss during aging. The decline in bone mass and structural integrity results in increased risk of fractures, particularly in post-menopausal women. Athletes competing in strength and power events, such as weight-lifting and jumping, have superior bone mass and structure compared with their untrained counterparts in all age groups. Exercise seems to be most effective during rapid growth, the average gain in bone mineral content (BMC) and density (BMD) in controlled trials being of the order of 2–5% per year. The net gain of BMD after exercise interventions among older people is modest, at a level of 1–3% per year, but it is not clear whether positive effects can be maintained over a longer time. Although aerobic exercise is important in maintaining overall health, the resistance type of muscle training may be more applicable to the basic rules of bone adaptation and site-specific effects of exercise, have more favorable effects in maintaining or improving bone mass and architecture, and be safe and feasible for older people. It has been suggested that there is an opportunity for resistance training, for improved effects on BMD in post-menopausal women in bones which have less daily loading. In addition to BMC and BMD, bone geometry and mass distribution may also change as a result of training and other treatment, such as hormonal replacement therapy, thereby further improving bone strength and reducing fracture risk. Appropriate training regimens may reduce the risk of falls and the severity of fall-related injuries, and also constitute potential therapy to improve functional ability and the quality of life in osteoporotic patients. However, further research is needed on dose-response relationships between exercise and bone strength, the feasibility of high-load, high-speed and impact-type of physical training, and the risks and benefits of intensive exercise in elderly individuals.

Effects of 12-week power training on bone in mobility-limited older adults: randomised controlled trial.

Number of 

Key takeaways:A 12-week power training program may enhance estimated bone strength in mobility-limited older adults, particularly in the upper limbs for females.

Abstract:SummaryThis study examines how power training affects estimated bone strength, revealing that females benefit more than males, especially in the upper limbs (radius). These findings highlight the importance of designing sex-specific exercise programs to enhance bone health. Further research is needed to optimize training duration and address site-specific differences.PurposeThis study aimed to compare the effects of 12-week of power training (PWT), an explosive form of strength training, on bone microarchitecture, estimated bone strength, and markers in mobility-limited (gait speed < 0.9 m/s) older adults.MethodsFifty-seven older adults (83 ± 5 years) were randomly assigned to either a training group (TRAIN, n = 28, 15 females, 13 males) performing high-intensity PWT or a control group (CTRL, n = 29, 22 females, 7 males) maintaining their usual lifestyle. High-resolution peripheral quantitative computed tomography (HR-pQCT) assessed bone geometry, densities, microarchitecture (e.g. trabecular number (Tb.N) and thickness (Tb.Th)), and estimated bone strength (stiffness and failure load) at the tibia and radius. Blood markers for bone metabolism (PINP and CTX-1) and muscle strength (handgrip and leg press) were also measured.ResultsBaseline sex differences showed females having lower stiffness (− 37.5%) and failure load (− 38%) at the radius compared with males. After PWT, females in the TRAIN group exhibited declines in Tb.N (− 4.4%) and improvements in Tb.Th (+ 6.0%), stiffness (+ 2.7%), and failure load (+ 2.4%) at the radius (p < 0.05). A time x group interaction indicated increases in leg press strength for the whole TRAIN group (+ 23%), and within females (+ 29%) and males (+ 19%) (p < 0.001). Baseline handgrip strength correlated with stiffness (r = 0.577) and failure load (r = 0.612) at the radius (p < 0.001). Females in the TRAIN group showed a reduction in PINP (− 25%), while males showed an increase in CTX-1 (+ 18%).ConclusionA 12-week PWT may enhance estimated bone strength in mobility-limited older adults, especially at sites less accustomed to daily loading (i.e. radius).Clinical trial registrationNCT02051725.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Physical activity increases bone strength, accrual, and mineral density, and reduces fracture risk in women.

Abstract:Physical activity stimulates adaptations to load bearing which increase bone strength, especially if it generates high loading rates. Exercise can increase bone accrual during development, which is an important determinant of peak bone mass. Exercise also has the potential to augment bone mineral in the mature skeleton. In premenopausal women, its effect is mainly conservation of bone, although specific bone-loading exercise can lead to modest bone accrual, or to reduction of bone loss in postmenopausal women. Exercise can also affect bone structural parameters that may influence bone strength independent of density. Women with a physically active lifestyle have a lower risk of osteoporotic fracture but, in established osteoporosis, the effects of exercise on bone mineral density are modest compared to those of pharmacological treatments. Many fractures are caused by falls and targeted strength and balance training is one of the most effective interventions for reducing fall risk in older people. Participation in sports involving high-intensity impacts or torsional stress are associated with increased risk for osteoarthritis, perhaps mediated through joint injury. On the other hand, inactivity is associated with increased risk of disability. Moderate amounts and intensities of exercise improve function in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee and hip and so exercise including local muscle strengthening and general aerobic fitness is a key component of osteoarthritis management strategies.

Impacts of muscle strength and flexibility on joints

Number of 

Key takeaways:Muscle strength and flexibility both positively influence joint health and the risk of injuries by improving joint stability, reducing injury risk, and increasing range of motion.

Abstract:Joints are stabilized by ligaments and initiated by muscle tendons. People’s joint health is correlated with muscle performance. This study focuses on muscle performance, including strength and flexibility, affects joint health and the risk of injury, and summarizes and discusses multiple experiments and case studies on different joints. Muscles aid in the control and movement of joints. Muscle strength would increase, resulting in greater stability and less imbalance force in the joints. Furthermore, stronger muscle strength benefits injury recovery and slows injury progression. Meanwhile, greater muscle flexibility can result in greater muscle strength and range of motion. The length of muscle tendons increases as joint flexibility increases, providing more range of motion in the joints and preventing muscles from fatiguing. Joint stiffness and pain are reduced as the range of motion of the joints increases. Therefore, muscle strength or flexibility can influence joint health and the risk of injuries.

High muscular fitness level may positively affect bone strength and body composition in children with overweight and obesity

Number of 

Key takeaways:High muscular fitness levels positively affect bone health and body composition in overweight/obese children, with isometric strength showing better bone health than dynamic strength.

Abstract:SummaryMuscular fitness plays a major role in bone health and body composition in overweight and obese children. It is key that the development of this muscle fitness is affected by absolute isometric strength and dynamic strength.PurposeTo compare bone health and body composition between overweight/obese children considering muscular fitness (MF) levels, and to investigate whether weight-bearing dynamic or absolute isometric strength, both involved in the development of this muscular fitness, are more related with bone health.MethodsMF of 59 overweight or obese children (10.1 ± 0.9 years, 27 females) was measured by a countermovement jump (CMJ), handgrip, and maximal isometric strength of knee extension. Participants were divided into four groups depending on their MF level performing a cluster analysis: 16 children with high MF (HMF) in all tests, 18 with high performance in isometric strength (HIS), 15 with high performance in CMJ (HCMJ) and 10 low isometric and low dynamic force values (LMF). Body composition values were measured by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry, and bone strength values were assessed by peripheral quantitative computed tomography. Motor skills were evaluated using TGMD-3. Multivariate analysis of covariance test was applied to analyse bone strength differences between children in the different MF groups, using maturity offset, height and weight as covariates, and correlations were investigated.ResultsHMF excelled in bone health. HIS had higher cortical bone area, periosteal circumference, bone mass, polar strength strain index and fracture load than LMF, while HCMJ only showed better results in trabecular bone area than LMF. HMF had significantly better values of fracture load and periosteal and endosteal circumferences than HCMJ, but not than HIS.ConclusionsHigh MF level shows positive effects on bone health in overweight/obese children. Those with highest isometric strength had better bone health compared to those with higher dynamic strength.Trial registrationThe research project was registered in a public database Clinicaltrials.gov in June 2020 with the identification number NCT04418713.

Sustained maintenance of exercise induced muscle strength gains and normal bone mineral density in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis: a 5 year follow up

Number of 

Key takeaways:A 2-year home-based strength training program in early rheumatoid arthritis patients maintained muscle strength gains and normalized bone mineral density over a 3-year follow-up period.

Abstract:Objective: To investigate at 5 years whether an initial 2 year home based strength training period imposes sustained effects on muscle strength, bone mineral density (BMD), structural joint damage, and on disease activity in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Methods: Seventy patients were randomised either to perform home based strength training with loads of 50–70% of repetition maximum (EG) or range of motion exercises (CG). Both groups were encouraged to take part in aerobic activities 2–3 times a week. Maximal muscle strength of different muscle groups was measured by dynamometers, and BMD at the femoral neck and lumbar spine by dual x ray densitometry. Disease activity was assessed by the 28 joint disease activity score, and joint damage by x ray findings. Results: 62 patients completed 2 years’ training and 59 patients attended check up at 5 years. Mean (SD) maximum muscle strength indices increased from baseline to 2 years—in EG from 212 (78) kg by a mean (95% CI) of 68 (55 to 80) and in CG from 195 (72) kg by 35 (13 to 60) kg—and remained at that level for the next 3 years. Development of BMD in EG tended to be more favourable than that in CG. Muscle strength training was not detrimental to joint structures or disease activity. Conclusion: The patients’ exercise induced muscle strength gains during a 2 year training period were maintained throughout a subsequent self monitored training period of 3 years. Despite substantial training effects in muscle strength, BMD values remained relatively constant. Radiographic damage remained low even at 5 years.

A randomized two-year study of the effects of dynamic strength training on muscle strength, disease activity, functional capacity, and bone mineral density in early rheumatoid arthritis.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Regular dynamic strength training combined with endurance-type physical activities improves muscle strength and physical function in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis, but not bone mineral density.

Abstract:OBJECTIVE
To evaluate the impact of a 2-year program of strength training on muscle strength, bone mineral density (BMD), physical function, joint damage, and disease activity in patients with recent-onset (<2 years) rheumatoid arthritis (RA).

METHODS
In this prospective trial, 70 RA patients were randomly assigned to perform either strength training (all major muscle groups of the lower and upper extremities and trunk, with loads of 50-70% of repetition maximum) or range of motion exercises (without resistance) twice a week; all were encouraged to engage in recreational activities 2-3 times a week. All patients completed training diaries (evaluated bi-monthly) and were examined at 6-month intervals. All were treated with medications to achieve disease remission. Maximum strength of the knee extensors, trunk flexors and extensors, and grip strength was measured with dynamometers. BMD was measured at the femoral neck and lumbar spine by dual x-ray densitometry. Disease activity was determined by the Disease Activity Score, the extent of joint damage by the Larsen score, and functional capacity by the Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ); walking speed was also measured.

RESULTS
Sixty-two patients (31 per group) completed the study. Strength training compliance averaged 1.4-1.5 times/week. The maximum strength of all muscle groups examined increased significantly (19-59%) in the strength-training group, with statistically significant improvements in clinical disease activity parameters, HAQ scores, and walking speed. While muscle strength, disease activity parameters, and physical function also improved significantly in the control group, the changes were not as great as those in the strength-training group. BMD in the femoral neck and spine increased by a mean +/- SD of 0.51 +/- 1.64% and by 1.17 +/- 5.34%, respectively, in the strength-training group, but decreased by 0.70 +/- 2.25% and 0.91 +/- 4.07% in the controls. Femoral neck BMD in the 17 patients with high initial disease activity (and subsequent use of oral glucocorticoids) remained constantly at a statistically significantly lower level than that in the other 45 patients.

CONCLUSION
Regular dynamic strength training combined with endurance-type physical activities improves muscle strength and physical function, but not BMD, in patients with early RA, without detrimental effects on disease activity.

Dynamic strength training in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis increases muscle strength but not bone mineral density.

Number of 

Key takeaways:Dynamic strength training significantly improves muscle strength in early rheumatoid arthritis patients without negatively impacting disease activity, but bone mineral density changes remain minor and insignificant.

Abstract:OBJECTIVE
To assess the effects of 12 months' dynamic strength training on muscle strength and bone mineral density (BMD) at the lumbar spine and femoral neck in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (RA).

METHODS
Thirty-two subjects in the training group (EG) and 33 in the control group (CG) completed the study. EG carried out strength training 2 times a week with moderate loads of 50-70% of repetition maximum. They were also encouraged to do recreational physical activities. CG performed recreational physical activities and range of motion exercises. Maximal strength of the knee extensors, trunk extensors and flexors, and grip strength were recorded with dynamometers. BMD was measured using dual x-ray absorptiometry. Modified Disease Activity Score, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and pain were used for the estimation of disease activity, and Stanford Health Assessment Questionnaire to measure functional disability.

RESULTS
The 12 month resistance training in EG led to statistically significant mean increases of 22-35% in all muscle groups examined. CG patients were also able to increase their strength to some degree (3-24%), but at the end of the study strengths in CG were significantly lower than in EG. By the end of the study lumbar spine BMD had changed by +0.19% (4.24) in EG and by -1.14% (4.36) in CG. The corresponding changes of femoral BMD were +1.10% (3.71) and -0.03% (3.58). The changes in BMD were minor and statistically not significant in both groups. However, femoral BMD was found to be decreased among those patients treated periodically with oral glucocorticoids (n = 15, 3 subjects from EG and 12 from CG) compared with changes in BMD among those not treated with systemic glucocorticoids (n = 50).

CONCLUSION
Minimally supervised strength training resulted in significant improvements in muscle strength without detrimental effects on disease activity. The detected annual changes in central BMD were minor and statistically insignificant in both groups. Special attention should be focused on those patients with RA with high disease activity and concomitant glucocorticoid treatment.

The Influence of Resistance Training on Joint Flexibility in Healthy Adults: A Systematic Review, Meta-analysis, and Meta-regression

Number of 

Key takeaways:Resistance training can improve joint flexibility in healthy adults, with high-intensity protocols having a magnified effect, but the high overall risk of bias and substantial heterogeneity limit definitive conclusions.

Abstract:Supplemental Digital Content is Available in the Text. Abstract Favro, F, Roma, E, Gobbo, S, Bullo, V, Di Blasio, A, Cugusi, L, and Bergamin, M. The influence of resistance training on joint flexibility in healthy adults: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression. J Strength Cond Res 39(3): 386–397, 2025—Joint flexibility is a key component of physical fitness. Despite the large body of evidence regarding the effectiveness of muscle stretching exercises, little is known about the effect of resistance training on flexibility. A systematic search was conducted on 9 academic search instruments; inclusion criteria were as follows: healthy adult participants (age ≥18 years); resistance training intervention (duration ≥4 weeks); at least one flexibility outcome. Risk of bias was assessed using the RoB-2 and ROBINS-I tools. A 3-level meta-analysis was conducted, with multiple outcomes nested within each study. A moderator analysis was conducted by fitting a meta-regression model. Significance level was set at p < 0.05. We included 36 studies (1,469 participants). None of the included papers resulted at a low risk of bias. The pooled effect size for resistance training on flexibility was g = 0.6325, with 95% CI: 0.4762 to 0.7888 (p < 0.0001). There was a substantial amount of heterogeneity between studies. Exercise intensity was a significant moderator (p < 0.0225, high vs low), based on 129 and unique effect sizes, and sex (p = 0.0429). Activity level and age were nonsignificant moderators. Resistance training could be implemented as a strategy to improve joint flexibility, with high-intensity protocols resulting in a magnified effect. However, the high overall risk of bias and substantial heterogeneity limit our ability to draw definitive conclusions.

Effectiveness and safety of strength training in rheumatoid arthritis

Number of 

Key takeaways:Moderate or high-intensity strength training effectively increases muscle strength in rheumatoid arthritis patients without causing negative effects on disease activity or pain.

Abstract:Purpose of reviewAs muscle weakness is common in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), strength training is considered to be an important cornerstone of the nonpharmacological treatment. The training methods have varied widely between the studies. Thus, the purpose of this review is to discuss effectiveness and safety but also basic principles and specificity of strength training. Recent findingsModerate or high-intensity strength training has been effective and well-tolerated method to increase or maintain muscle strength in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. No deleterious effects on disease activity and pain were observed. More information is needed regarding long-term effects of strength training on functional capacity, bone mineral density, and radiologic progression. SummaryModerate or high-intensity strength training programs have better training effects on muscle strength in RA than low-intensity programs. The type of exercises, intensity, and frequency of training are key factors in the effectiveness of training. It is, however, essential to maintain the training routine to obtain long-term benefits from it.

Brief Review: Effects of Isometric Strength Training on Strength and Dynamic Performance

Number of 

Key takeaways:Isometric strength training (IST) induces less fatigue and improves joint angle specific strength, benefiting sports-related dynamic performances like running, jumping, and cycling.

Abstract:Abstract This review used a narrative summary of findings from studies that focused on isometric strength training (IST), covering the training considerations that affect strength adaptations and its effects on sports related dynamic performances. IST has been shown to induce less fatigue and resulted in superior joint angle specific strength than dynamic strength training, and benefited sports related dynamic performances such as running, jumping and cycling. IST may be included into athletes’ training regime to avoid getting overly fatigue while still acquiring positive neuromuscular adaptations; to improve the strength at a biomechanically disadvantaged joint position of a specific movement; to improve sports specific movements that require mainly isometric contraction; and when athletes have limited mobility due to injuries. To increase muscle hypertrophy, IST should be performed at 70–75% of maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) with sustained contraction of 3–30 s per repetition, and total contraction duration of>80–150 s per session for>36 sessions. To increase maximum strength, IST should be performed at 80–100% MVC with sustained contraction of 1–5 s, and total contraction time of 30–90 s per session, while adopting multiple joint angles or targeted joint angle. Performing IST in a ballistic manner can maximize the improvement of rate of force development.

INFLUENCE OF PHYSICAL TRAINING ON THE PHYSICAL QUALITY OF UNIVERSITY STUDENTS

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training improves college students' physical health indices, including stability, flexibility, and reduced blood pressure in obese youth.

Abstract:ABSTRACT Introduction Although the overall physical health of university students has positive rates in recent years, indicators such as body composition, vital capacity, and flexibility have declined, following the indicators of speed and strength. Several studies corroborate the beneficial impacts of strength training, accelerating the metabolism of university students, reducing injuries and joint pain, and increasing flexibility, bone density, and self-image of obese students. In light of this situation, the government, through schools and related departments, encourage effective measures to control the current situation under a new context. Objective Study the impacts of strength training on the physical fitness of college students. Methods 70 male college students in a physical education institute were randomly divided into an experimental group and a control group, with 35 people in each group. Systematically protocoled and scientifically validated physical exercises were performed for eight weeks. After the implementation of physical exercise, physical quality indicators were evaluated. Results Functional physical training raised the scores of several sports of male college students. There was also an effective reduction in blood pressure in obese youth, improvement in vascular elasticity index, vital capacity, cardiovascular system function, exercise capacity, and strengthening physique. The results of the seven FMS tests were significantly improved. Physical function training can significantly improve and strengthen students’ core, hip, shoulder, knee, and ankle stability and flexibility. Conclusion Strength training has been shown to improve college students’ physical health indices. Level of evidence II; Therapeutic studies - investigation of treatment outcomes.

Effect of low-intensity muscle strength training on postoperative rehabilitation and adverse events in patients with knee osteoarthritis over 55 years of age: a meta-analysis

Number of 

Key takeaways:Low-intensity muscle strength training improves muscle strength and joint score, reduces visual analogue scale score, and reduces adverse events in patients with knee osteoarthritis over 55 years of age after surgery, but has no effect on postoperative knee range of motion.

Abstract:This study aimed to study the effect of low-intensity muscle strength training on postoperative rehabilitation of patients with knee osteoarthritis over 55 years of age and the incidence of adverse events by a meta-analysis. We searched China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), WanFang, China Science and Technology Journal Database (VIP), PubMed, Web of science, and Embase databases for articles on the effect of low-intensity muscle strength training on the recovery of patients with knee arthritis. And meta-analysis combined effect was performed in R 4.2.2 software. Quantitative analysis and risk of bias were assessed by Begg's and Eegger's test. Meta-analysis showed that the effect of low-intensity muscle strength training on postoperative knee range of motion in patients with knee arthritis was mean difference (MD) = 5.20, 95% CI=, τ2 = 0.43, P = 0.34; the effect on postoperative muscle strength was standard mean difference (SMD) = 1.24, 95% CI=, τ2 = 0.07, P < 0.01; the effect on postoperative knee joint score was MD = 5.88, 95%CI=, τ2 = 16.60, P < 0.01; the effect on postoperative knee visual analogue scale (VAS) score was MD=-1.12, 95%CI =, τ2 = 0.09, P < 0.001; the effect on the incidence of adverse events was RR = 0.85, 95%CI= , τ2 = 0.79, P = 0.04. Low-intensity muscle strength training can improve the muscle strength of the affected limb and knee joint score, reduce the VAS score and the incidence of adverse events in patients with knee osteoarthritis over 55 years of age after surgery, but it has no effect on the postoperative knee range of motion, so it can be considered as appropriate in clinical selection.

The Psychological Effects of Strength Exercises in People who are Overweight or Obese: A Systematic Review

Number of 

Key takeaways:Strength training shows some weak positive effects on self-efficacy, self-esteem, inhibition, and psychological disorders in overweight or obese individuals, but more evidence is needed before drawing conclusions.

Abstract:Overweightness and obesity represent a high burden on well-being and society. Strength training has positive effects on body composition and metabolic health for people who are overweight or obese. The evidence for psychological effects of strength exercises is unclear.The aim of this study was to assess the psychological effects of strength exercises for people who are overweight or obese.Relevant literature was identified by use of the PubMed and PsycINFO databases. For each study, effect sizes and corresponding variance estimates were extracted or calculated for the main effects of strength exercises on psychological outcomes.Seventeen studies were included. There was almost no overlap among the various measures of psychological constructs. The constructs were ordered into eight broad categories. Meta-analytical techniques revealed substantial heterogeneity in effect sizes, and combined with the low number of effect size estimates for each outcome measure, this precluded meta-analysis. Organization of the data showed that the evidence base so far does not show convincing effects of strength training on psychological outcome measures. Some weak effects emerged on self-efficacy, self-esteem, inhibition, and psychological disorders (e.g., anxiety and depression). No additional or comparable effects to other interventions were found for mood, outcome expectations, quality of life, and stress.The main finding of this review is that despite a strong theoretical basis for expecting positive effects of strength training on psychological outcomes, the literature shows a large gap in this area. The existing research does not show a clear picture: some positive results might exist, but there is a strong need to accumulate more evidence before drawing conclusions.

About the creator ofLongevity Protocols

Co-founder of technology companiesMDBootstrapandCogniVis AI/ Listed inForbes '30 under 30'/EOer/ Enthusiast of open-source projects, fascinated by the intersection of technology and longevity /Dancer, nerd and bookworm /

In the past, a youth educator in orphanages and correctional facilities.